Once around Giza 581
and I love the picture at the start of
this video which we will look at as we
go through depicting Giza 581 and its
family of planets.
So 581
is in the constellation of Libra not far
from beta Libra there. So, it should be
possible to track that down, although
it's a little bit faint. Magnitude 10.5.
Should just about be able to find that
with good binoculars or a small
telescope. And it's one of the sun's
near neighbors at a distance of just
over 20 light years from us here on
Earth.
Physically, it's a red dwarf star, class
M3.
So, at the hotter end of the red dwarf
scale, around 30% the mass of the sun,
and with a temperature of 3,500 Kelvin
glowing away there. Most of the light
comes away in the infrared part of the
spectrum. Um, only a small portion is in
the visible and that's all red. So,
that's why we see it that color.
And it's ancient. It's estimated to be
9.5 billion years old,
double the age of the sun.
Low in uh flare activity, probably going
along with that great age. Young red
dwarfs tend to be very much uh flare
stars, but this one seems to have calmed
down. But what made it interesting was
the discovery of the family of planets.
And here's that original photograph
again showing the solar system or part
of it at the top with the sun, Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, and Jupiter with the
blue band marking the habitable zone
with Earth right in the habitable zone.
Mars on the outside edge, Venus just a
little bit on the uh border between
habitable and not. But of course with
that thick uh atmosphere of carbon
dioxide, the runaway greenhouse has made
it uh uh really very very hot indeed.
Pisa 581 being one of these smaller red
dwarf stars, you have to get a lot
closer to it and so the habitable zone
sweeps in. And we have a plot of the
relative positions and sizes of the
planets that were found going around
Gleer 581 BC, D, E, F, and G in the
order of discovery, not in the order of
distance from the star. So E is the
nearest one. G is right in the middle of
the habitable zone, just like Earth is.
and D on the outer side of the zone. But
a bigger planet than Mars and you know a
bigger planet well more atmosphere
probably better greenhouse effect might
be uh quite habitable indeed.
In fact, we constructed a habitability
index using Earth and Mars as two fixed
points, assigning them one and 66, 2/3
for Earth and Mars, respectively, and
then attempted to classify other planets
around other stars according to this
scale. And Gleaser 581G
was the record holder at 0.92. So 92%
Earthlike and you can see that on the
left of the diagram and 581D well that
came in at 72% on the right hand side
along with the three other examples in
between. So this 581 system got two out
of the top most habitable known worlds
when this scale was constructed.
But what do we know about them? Well,
let's go through in order of discovery.
581b.
This seems to be a Neptune mass 16 Earth
mass planet orbiting close to the star
in just 5.4 days, 0.04
astronomical units. So that's uh a lot
closer to uh its star than any of the
planets in our solar system. But the
star being a bit cooler, that's not
always a bad thing. But this one is so
close that it's likely to be extremely
hot, utterly scorched by material
ejected from the star. The solar wind
and coronal mass ejections coming away
will just uh fry the outside layer of
this star.
C.
Another super Earth planet seven Earth
masses. So a little bit larger than the
Earth but with correspondingly greater
mass with the volume of the planet
growing according to the cube of the
radius. And this orbits in 13 days a
little bit further away 0.07.
And although that was thought to be in
the habitable zone when it was first
discussed, it's really too close to the
star. And with this larger mass comes
the likelihood of a thicker atmosphere
and therefore a runaway greenhouse
uh event. And so it perhaps more
reasonable to describe this as a super
Venus rather than a super Earth.
However, it was the target of a message
from Earth. This was the name of a
message that was beamed to 581C
back in 2008. They collected up a group
of over 500
uh messages and packaged them up,
sent them off, and the message will
travel across space and get there in
2029.
And then if anyone's there listening and
decides to reply, we'll get the reply
around 2050. So, uh, quite a while to
wait yet.
581D,
the next planet to be found. Again, a
super Earth, 7 times the Earth's mass.
This one orbiting at 83
day orbit and 21% of the Earth's sun
distance, 0.21 21 AU. That puts it at
the outer edge of the habitable zone.
And again, a decent atmosphere would,
unlike Mars, be able to warm it up and
make it entirely habitable, except for
the fact that it doesn't exist at all.
It's been disproven. The supposed 83day
orbital signature in the radial velocity
data turned out to be from activity on
the surface of the star itself as the
stars span around. Now that's a shame
because this was targeted with another
message, hello from Earth. And this was
from the Australian National Science
Week sponsored by the Cosmos magazine.
And this one they collected together
25,000 messages from 195 countries. And
uh although everybody had to send it
with 160 characters of English and this
was transmitted from the Canra Deep
Space Communication Complex in 2009.
So uh if we're wrong about the fact that
this planet does not exist, maybe it's
there. Maybe we'll change our minds
again on that one. Um, but still have to
wait till about 2050 before we're going
to get a reply.
It also turned up in various uh media
appearances. Into the universe with
Steven Hawking. Um, episode 3, the story
of everything contains references to
Gleaser 581D. It's the setting for the
episode Smile in the Doctor Who episode
and it turns up in episode three and
eight of season 2 of How the Universe
Works. So again, it'd be embarrassing if
it's not really there at all. But uh
we'll see the people change their minds
as we collect more data when we're
detecting these things. Sometimes we're
on the ragged edge of technologies
capability.
Next planet 581E.
This is the innermost planet.
Little bit more massive than the Earth.
2.5 times the Earth's mass. Just a
little bit larger. Orbits around very uh
quickly in 3.15 days at 0.028
astronomical units. And so this one
really is toast. It's 500 Kelvin and
absolutely scorched. And that 500 Kelvin
probably an underestimate
probably rocky
but likely that the near proximity of
the star is going to mean that this one
is suffering severe tidal heating much
as Jupiter's moon Io does. The innermost
of Jupiter's large moons gets squeezed
and squashed by tidal forces which
creates friction in its core and heats
it up. So this is probably being
scorched from the outside and baked from
the middle. Thoroughly nasty place
indeed.
And the other extreme, if we go to Giza
581F,
this orbits in a period of 433 days at a
Venuslike distance of 0.758
astronomical units and again is another
super Earth 7 Earth mass planet. We seem
to be finding a lot of these. Although
again, I'm afraid the discovery of this
one has also been refuted by another
recent paper that was unable to repeat
the evidence of its existence.
And finally, Gleaser 581G.
This one got so popular that it was even
given a name, Zarina's world. three
times the mass of the Earth. So, a
little bit larger and orbiting in 36.6
days
at just 15% of the Earth's sun distance,
0.146 AU, putting it slap bang in the
habitable zone. This was the one that
was considered to be the most Earthlike
planet discovered to date.
So much so that it got itself into the
film battleship. It was supposed to be
the home of the alien planets. It's
referred to as planet G a couple of
times and also uh that the signal c
comes from Giza 581. So that was the
planet where these rather ugly looking
aliens came from. But sadly that's not
there at all either. So, we're getting
more data and now we're at the point
where the Gleer 581 system really only
has uh the planets B, C, E, and D
present. We're not absolutely sure about
D either, as it turns out. So, going
from a a lovely seven planet
arrangement, we're down to four and
possibly down even to three in this
system. So again, I think this is just
crying out for better tech and more
telescopes. And what's wrong with that?
And with that little map of the Gleer
581 system, I'll leave you for now.
Thanks very much for listening.